A few years ago it seemed far out of reach (at
least for OA advocates and maybe even for the heads of acquisition) and
for more than two years now something has been on everybody's lips:
Whether management in higher education, scholars, librarians, or science
journalists -- "DEAL" is repeatedly associated with a project that aims
at closing a national deal for scholarly publications, first and
foremost with the three top dog publishers Elsevier, Springer Nature and
Wiley, and -- later on -- maybe even further academic publishers.

What's special about that? The deal shall not only include access to
scholarly journals, with one price tag and transparent pricing. It shall
also include an open access component for all "German" articles. In
other words, authors affiliated with institutions that are part of the
DEAL consortium shall be able to publish their articles open access.
Publish and Read (PAR), one deal at one transparent price. It would mean
a huge step for the open access transformation of the journal market.

The (tough) negotiations with Elsevier have in particular been in the
national and international spot. Since the beginning of 2017 as many as
76 German research or higher education institutions did not have a
license agreement with the publisher. Scholars from these institutions
cannot access Elsevier journals directly.[^1] Some feared scholars would
riot, this fear turned out to be unsubstantiated, though.[^2] As of end
of October 2017, 109 institutions have announced not to renew individual
agreements with Elsevier when the year closes. Thus, from January 2018
on 185 institutions[^3] will either be part of a national DEAL
consortium, or Elsevier journals cannot not be accessed.

Reports on the DEAL project have been numerous, on the project's aims as
well as the negotiation progress (or rather negotiation deadlock).[^4]
Our primary interest was different though. The endeavor is of high
relevance for the current and future publishing landscape in German
academia. How can it be accomplished? Which wheels have to mesh to
complete the project successfully? What do the negotiations require from
people and institutions involved? We have interviewed Bernhard
Mittermaier, member of the DEAL negotiating team. The interview was led
and translated by Michaela Voigt and Maxi Kindling.

### Chronology and team

***LIBREAS**: When was the idea for project DEAL born? Is there a point
in time that can be considered as starting point?*

**BM**: In summer 2013 the rector of the Universität Leipzig approached
the German Rectors' Conference ('Hochschulrektorenkonferenz' or 'HRK' in
short) and suggested to negotiate licensing agreements with the major
journal publishers on a national level.[^5] The HRK in turn approached
the Alliance of Science Organisations in Germany that finally
commissioned an already existing working group ("AG Lizenzen") to
investigate the matter. The expert report should assess under which
conditions the portfolio of major academic publishers could be part of a
national license agreement. Anne Lipp (German Research Foundation),
Hildegard Schäffler (Bavarian State Library) and myself were then
jointly heading the working group AG Lizenzen and took on the matter on
behalf of the working group. Building on this expertise the Alliance of
Science Organisations in Germany set up a project team -- a group that,
with a few additions, exists to this very day.[^6] The project team was
later joined by the steering committee and, in 2016, the negotiating
group. Furthermore, two full-time positions have been funded since 2015.

***LIBREAS**: That sounds rather straightforward. With some insight in
the landscape of libraries and higher education in Germany, one can
suspect this to be rather difficult. What did it take to turn the idea
into a project?*

**BM**: Two things are essential -- many institutions, whether higher
education sector and other research organisations, want central
negotiations and want them to be led in a completely new context, and
they are prepared to conduct these negotiations with the necessary
severity. It is equally important to have support from all areas --
management, scholars and libraries.

***LIBREAS:** The team is quite heterogeneous. Coincidence or
intention?*

**BM**: The team as such consists of three groups -- the actual project
team, the negotiating group and the project steering committee.[^7] Care
was taken to ensure that libraries and academics, the various
disciplines and various types of institutions were adequately
represented in all three groups. The widest representation of all
perspectives is given in the project steering committee. The project
team consists of librarians only, whereas academics dominate the
negotiation team. To use a nautical analogy: The engine room is staffed
with librarians, the ship's bridge is staffed with academics.

***LIBREAS:** And you are certainly also exchanging ideas with
colleagues from abroad?*

**BM**: Well, we are talking with others, during conferences for
example. But the negotiations are conducted separately.

***LIBREAS:** There are two project positions -- "only two" or "two
after all", whichever way you prefer. Do all others contribute to DEAL
as part of their official duties? How much time do you invest in the
project, for example?*

**BM**: DEAL massively ties up resources, this holds true for both
members of the project and the negotiation team. Personally, I probably
invest at least 20 hours a week.

### The publishers

***LIBREAS**: How was the DEAL initiative taken up by publishers?*

**BM**: The publishers initially assured themselves that the DEAL
negotiations were indeed mandated by the German research institutions.
Consequently, they were open for negotiations.

***LIBREAS:** How many persons are involved on the publisher's side, can
you give a rough estimate?*

**BM**: During negotiation talks, five people are present on the
publisher's side on average -- at least two hierarchical levels from
sales, as well as dedicated experts, also in the field of Open Access.
We can not estimate how many persons are involved behind the scenes.

***LIBREAS**: Press reports suggest that both parties pull no punches.
How would you describe the appearance of the publishers -- both during
the negotiating sessions and in public?*

**BM**: Overall, the appearance is correct and professional. Still,
neither party gives something away for free. For official announcements
we have come to good terms with both Wiley and Springer Nature: We
coordinate what information is released to institutions and retailers;
in the meantime there were even joint press releases. Details are
released very discreetly. This does not satisfy the understandable need
for information of the public. But it helps to continue negotiations
without major disruptions.

Looking at Elsevier, the situation is more difficult: Although we agreed
not to release details publicly, Elsevier gradually shied away -- when
communicating with individual institutions at first, and little by
little even when communicating with journal editors. Meanwhile, the
present offer is fairly open -- some "dirty details" are missing though
and, above all, financial aspects are left in the dark.

***LIBREAS**: In general, how is the project received by the (national
and international) publishing market? Are you in contact with other
publishers already?*

**BM**: Other publishers are following the project closely. It is
understandable that deals with the three largest publishers in Germany,
which account for more than half of the market, would have an impact on
other publishers in Germany as well as on publishers\' international
business. At the beginning there was an antitrust complaint of the
Börsenverein, the interest group of German publishers. The lobby
expressed concerns that by joining the DEAL consortium the entire budget
would be consumed and libraries would not have the funds for other
publishers. This concern was apparently based on the assumption that one
would have to spend more on a DEAL contract than before. The German
Federal Cartel Office (Bundeskartellamt) did not take up on this path,
but apparently some publishers submit to the propaganda of their own
association: they now want to conduct own DEAL negotiations in order to
get a (supposedly larger) piece of the cake. For reasons of capacity the
DEAL negotiating team currently can not take up negotiations with other
publishers. However, there are some negotiations under the umbrella of
the proposal \"Open Access Transformation Contracts\" of the German
Research Foundation DFG. They are negotiated by individual institutions,
similar to the DFG funded 'Alliance licenses'.

### Getting prepared and negotiations

***LIBREAS:** How is the DEAL office organised?*

**BM**: There is no actual DEAL office. The Alliance of Science
Organisations in Germany funds two project positions: One position has a
focus on data collection and analysis, located at the Max Planck Digital
Library in Munich, one position has a focus on public relations, located
at the University Library Freiburg. Furthermore, we are supported by the
office of the regional consortium Baden-Wuerttemberg, which is also
located at the University Library Freiburg.

***LIBREAS:** The DEAL team is preparing for a new negotiating session.
How does that look like? Is there a flood of emails, strategy
papers\...?*

**BM**: Initially, there were many meetings, face to face and
videoconferencing, for example to set the DEAL negotiating goals. In the
meantime, the preparation mainly takes place via email and before the
actual negotiating session, in the form of preliminary meetings. The
negotiating team is now very well established.

***LIBREAS:** How do negotiations come about, who sets the dates?*

**BM**: The office of Professor Hippler proposes dates, which are then
coordinated in the negotiating group -- we doodle, to put it briefly. We
always try to gather as many academics as possible and at least one
librarian. The result will then be coordinated with the publishers.
It\'s easy to imagine that finding a date is not easy, also because
based in the Netherlands, Great Britain and even the USA are involved on
the publishers' side.

***LIBREAS:** How should one envision the atmosphere in the negotiating
room?*

**BM**: The sessions last between two and four hours and usually take
place in the rooms of the German Rectors\' Conference in Bonn or Berlin.
Professor Hippler, President of the German Rectors\' Conference HRK, is
the main negotiator for the DEAL team. As already mentioned, the
negotiation team consists of academics and librarians, the team is very
well established. Sure, the mood is tense more often than it is
resolved, most of the time words are not minced. But there has always
been a handshake -- even at the farewells.

***LIBREAS:** How common is the term \"SciHub\" during such a session?*

**BM:** In the meantime, only rarely. The publishers know that
ultimately we are interested in signing a deal -- and not in choosing
between a DEAL contract and Sci-Hub. Conversely, if it is claimed that a
research institution could not do without the publisher\'s journals, we
point out that the experience of Elsevier dropouts teaches something
different: various legal ways of alternative document delivery are used
to ensure the literature supply at the individual institutions.

### Criticism

***LIBREAS:** You negotiate a DEAL with publishers that have a focus on
the traditional publishing model. What does this actually have to do
with Open Access? *

**BM**: A lot, by now. Sure, the initial focus was negotiating
subscription deals. But all parties realized very quickly that this
could not be the end of the road. Apart from access to all of the
publisher's journals for all participating institutions, the
negotiations also aim at unleashing articles by academics of the
participating institutions. That is to ensure that if an academic from a
participating institution is corresponding author, the article is
published Open Access and under CC BY, an Open Access compliant license.
In addition, the costs incurred should be fair and forward-thinking --
and they should be based on the number of articles. In other words, for
all subscription journals of the publishers concerned the DEAL project
would put participating institutions almost in the same position as if
it were open access journals: own articles are Gold OA and are published
under CC BY. All other articles can be accessed, but not used under the
terms of a Creative Commons license. No further costs are incurred for
publishing Gold Open Access. The same goes for all gold open access
journals -- they would be included in the DEAL contract with the
according publisher, authors would not have to pay additional article
processing charges.

***LIBREAS:** OA advocates criticize that DEAL leads to a further
commercialization of the scholarly publication market and gives
preference to the \"big ones\" -- while grassroots initiatives and newly
founded OA publishers, especially in the field of OA monographs, are
under constant financial pressure. What do you think about this?*

**BM**: DEAL wants to make a contribution to the Open Access
transformation of scholarly publishing. It is true that the actual DEAL
negotiations are limited to these three publishers. However, there are
also discussions with other publishers in connection with the call for
proposals \"Open Access Transformation Contracts\" by the German
Research Foundation DFG. All publishers who are ready to embark on a
journey to transformation are invited to participate. Apart from that,
DEAL does not presume to intervene in the freedom of research and
teaching guaranteed by the constitution. Also, we do not want to dictate
scholars where to publish, but we want to make sure the publishing
options that scholars can select freely from meet the needs of the
scholarly system. In our view, this means that they should become open
access if they are not already.

### Outlook

***LIBREAS**: When will we have reached a DEAL?*

**BM:** Talks with Springer Nature and Wiley are well on their way. When
it became apparent in September 2017 that the agreement could not be
concluded by the end of the year, a transitional solution had to be
found in order to avoid a contractless status from January 2018 on.[^8]
Such a transitional solution was possible with both publishers and
agreed upon via email, in telephone conferences and at the recent
Frankfurt book fair. Due to the good atmosphere during these talks and
the publishers\' willingness to sign up for the DEAL route, which has
now become contractually evident, I am optimistic that a deal can be
reached, probably in the first or second quarter of 2018.

With Elsevier the situation is very different. Although the negotiations
have lasted almost a year longer, they are less advanced than those with
Springer Nature and Wiley. Elsevier has not yet accepted the approach of
exclusively paying for publishing. Also, the mutual setup is much more
confronting: institutions have not extended their expiring contracts. At
the beginning of 2017, this involved almost 70 institutions, and now the
number is up to 180 and more. At the beginning of October, the first
resignations of editors were handed over to Elsevier and announced
publicly.[^9] Elsevier, on the other hand, is reaching out to individual
institutions -- even though there are no negotiations to be held.
Editors are contacted and invited to \"Editors Dinners\", and contact
with rectorates and ministries is sought. The alleged purpose is to
break up the lines on the side of DEAL -- so far without success. One
can only hope that the transitional solutions with Wiley and Springer
Nature, which have met great interest in the public, trigger some action
on Elsevier's side. If this does not happen, there will be further
escalation: more institutions will terminate agreements, editors will
resign at regular intervals. Eventually DEAL will announce Elsevier\'s
latest offer to the institutions, including financial details. At the
latest when deals with Wiley and Springer Nature are concluded, Elsevier
will have to put their cards on the table. If there is still no progress
to be seen, one must assume that Elsevier would rather forego sales in
Germany than to question their business model. But even that would be
very risky for the publisher: After all, it is a large field trial to
the question of whether you can live without Elsevier journals.

***LIBREAS**: From the DEAL team's perspective -- what is desirable?*

**BM:** That involved institutions remain calm. Rarely, if ever, has
there been such an attempt. It receives international attention, not to
say admiration. And it has the best chance of success.

***LIBREAS**: Dear Mr. Mittermaier, thank you very much for your time!*

[^1]: In the meantime Elsevier has restored access for most
    institutions, see
    [http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2017/02/elsevier-journals-are-back-online-60-german-institutions-had-lost-access](http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2017/02/elsevier-journals-are-back-online-60-german-institutions-had-lost-access)

[^2]: See e.g.
    [http://www.nature.com/news/german-scientists-regain-access-to-elsevier-journals-1.21482](http://www.nature.com/news/german-scientists-regain-access-to-elsevier-journals-1.21482),
    [https://www.helmholtz.de/en/current\_topics/press\_releases/artikel/artikeldetail/helmholtz\_zentren\_kuendigen\_die\_vertraege\_mit\_elsevier/](https://www.helmholtz.de/en/current_topics/press_releases/artikel/artikeldetail/helmholtz_zentren_kuendigen_die_vertraege_mit_elsevier/)
    or
    [https://www.berliner-zeitung.de/berlin/hohe-preise-berliner-universitaeten-kuendigen-vertrag-mit-grossem-wissenschaftsverlag-27926974](https://www.berliner-zeitung.de/berlin/hohe-preise-berliner-universitaeten-kuendigen-vertrag-mit-grossem-wissenschaftsverlag-27926974)

[^3]: Since beginning of 2017 there has been 76 institutions without license agreement: 30 universities, 16 universities of applied
    science, 27 research institutions as well as 3 state libraries. In
    total, 109 institutions with subscriptions ending by December 2017
    have announced not to renew their individual license agreements,
    whereof 29 universities, 57 universities of applied science and 23
    research institutions. See
    [https://www.projekt-deal.de/vertragskundigungen-elsevier-2017/](https://www.projekt-deal.de/vertragskundigungen-elsevier-2017/)
    (as of 12.11.2017)

[^4]: See press review on the project website
    [https://www.projekt-deal.de/press-review/](https://www.projekt-deal.de/press-review/)

[^5]: [http://www.tagesspiegel.de/wissen/teure-fachzeitschriften-nationallizenzen-fuer-uni-bibliotheken-gefordert/8624114.html](http://www.tagesspiegel.de/wissen/teure-fachzeitschriften-nationallizenzen-fuer-uni-bibliotheken-gefordert/8624114.html)

[^6]: [https://www.projekt-deal.de/about-deal/](https://www.projekt-deal.de/about-deal/)

[^7]: See figure "Project structure" at
    [https://www.projekt-deal.de/about-deal/](https://www.projekt-deal.de/about-deal/)

[^8]: [https://www.projekt-deal.de/vertragskundigungen-elsevier-2017/](https://www.projekt-deal.de/vertragskundigungen-elsevier-2017/)

[^9]: [https://www.projekt-deal.de/herausgeber\_elsevier/](https://www.projekt-deal.de/herausgeber_elsevier/)
